# 5-APDI
*Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/5-APDI*

5-(2-Aminopropyl)-2,3-dihydro-1H-indene (5-APDI), also known as indanylaminopropane (IAP), 2-aminopropylindane (2-API), indanametamine, and, incorrectly, as indanylamphetamine, is an entactogen and psychedelic drug of the amphetamine family. It has been sold by online vendors through the Internet and has been encountered as a designer drug since 2003, but its popularity and availability has diminished in recent years.
5-APDI appears to act as a potent and weakly selective serotonin releasing agent (SSRA) with IC50 values of 82 nM, 1,848 nM, and 849 nM for inhibiting the reuptake of serotonin, dopamine, and norepinephrine, respectively. It fully substitutes for MBDB but not amphetamine in trained animals, though it does produce disruption for the latter at high doses.
5-APDI has been classified as a class B drug under the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 since 10 June 2014.
The fusion of 5-APDI with 3,3-Diphenylpropylamine was reported in a 1968 patent. The dose (of the HCl salt) was judged to be 55mg per tablet (corr. to 50mg of the Fb). The compound had valuable pharmacodynamic properties whilst it's toxicity was low. It produces a vasodilatation and thus improves peripheral blood circulation and a pronounced coronary dilatation. The compound further exhibits a blood pressure lowering effect and is therefore indicated for use in the treatment of hypertonia and circulatory illnesses, especially Angina pectoris and other stenocardiac disorders and in the treatment of organic or functional coronary insufficiencies and peripheral blood circulation disorders.
