# Guarana
*Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guarana*

Guaraná ( from the Portuguese guaraná [ɡʷaɾɐˈna]; Paullinia cupana, syns. P. crysan, P. sorbilis) is a climbing plant in the family Sapindaceae, native to the Amazon basin and especially common in Brazil. Guaraná has large leaves and clusters of flowers, and is best known for the seeds from its beans, which are about the size of a coffee bean.
As a dietary supplement or herb, guaraná seed is an effective stimulant: it contains about twice the concentration of caffeine found in coffee beans (about 2–8% caffeine in guaraná seeds, compared to about 1–3% for coffee beans). The additive has gained notoriety for being used in energy drinks. As with other plants producing caffeine, the high concentration of caffeine is a defensive toxin that repels insects from the berry and seeds.
The color of the fruit ranges from brown to red and it contains black seeds that are partly covered by white arils. The color contrast when the fruit is split open has been compared with the appearance of eyeballs, and has become the basis of an origin myth among the Sateré-Mawé people.

## History and culture

The word guaraná has its origins in the Sateré-Maué word for the plant, warana.
Guaraná plays an important role in Tupi and Guarani culture. According to a myth attributed to the Sateré-Maué tribe, guaraná's domestication originated with a deity killing a beloved village child. To console the villagers, a more benevolent god plucked the left eye from the child and planted it in the forest, resulting in the wild variety of guaraná. The god then plucked the right eye from the child and planted it in the village, giving rise to domesticated guaraná.
The Guaranis make a herbal tea called cupana by shelling, washing and drying the seeds, followed by pounding them into a fine powder. The powder is kneaded into a dough and then shaped into cylinders. This product is known as guaraná bread, which is grated and then immersed into hot water along with sugar.
This plant was introduced to European colonizers and to Europe in the 16th century by Felip Betendorf, Oviedo, Hernández, Cobo and other Spaniard chroniclers. It has since been used, refined, adapted and commercialized by settlers, folklorists, food scientists, and marketers.

## Ideal growth conditions

Guarana thrives in warm and humid environments, where annual temperature ranges from 23-28°C, the relative humidity is around 80% and the yearly rainfall reaches 1,500-3000 mm. The crop prefers deep, well-drained soils without stones and can be grown on either inclined or flat terrain.

## Cultivation practices

Guarana was domesticated in the forests between the Tapajós River and the lower Madeira river in the Brazilian Amazon. The two dominating production modes are multi-species systems/ agroforestry and intensive monoculture plantation. Agroforestry systems are especially common amongst indigenous people. It was shown, that the soils of guarana agroforestry sytems and their sourrounding forest have both a low natural fertility. Nevertheless, indigenous farmers have developed ways to maintain the average nutrient composition of the soils compared to the adjacent forest which suggests that efficient nutrient cycling is taking place. Additionally, certain traditional agroecosystems produce litter with significantly higher concentrations of macro- and micronutrients compared to the native forest and could therefore be a sustainable method for improving the chemical quality of regions with highly weathered soils. Monoculture Systems on the other hand can be resulting from slash-and-burn forest clearance and involve periodic cleaning and pruning for pest control. 
The guarana tree can be propagated sexually via seeds or asexually via cuttings. Seed production is generally not recommended due to the resulting genetic variability which results in plants with different phenotypes and productivity. To maintain the characteristics of the parent plant a propagule only consisting of somatic cells is taken and planted again. This is a way of clonally reproducing the plant which helps to maintain uniformity in the offspring.
In the Alto Urupadi region located in the municipality of Maués (state of Amazonas) guarana harvest starts in September and can last until December. The harvest is executed by hand using scissors and pruning shears (Tesoura), sickles (Terçado), baskets and fibre sacks for transport. The berries are picked individually, if only few  are ripe or if possible as an entire fruit bunch. The fructification of the guarana tree is not uniform which is the reason why the guarana harvest is manual and staggered over an extended period of time. This current labor-intensive way of harvesting is very costly which makes it economically less attractive.

## Pests and disease details

The Amazonian climate is characterized by high temperatures (annual average of 27.2 °C) and abundant rainfall (approximately 2100 mm per year). This provides favorable conditions for certain pathogens to develop. There are three major pests and diseases impacting cultivation of guarana significantly: Thrips (Pseudophilothrips adisi Zur Strassen), anthracnose (Colletotrichum guaranicola Albuq.), and oversprouting caused by Fusarium decemcellulare Brick. They led to periods of stagnation in guarana production. 
Another major constraint in guarana cultivation is weed interference. Weeds are capable to reduce guarana yields up to 65%. This makes effective weed management essential to sustain production. Unfortunately are herbicides often favored over mechanical weed  control. This because they offer a more consistent and efficient weed suppression, especially in the hot and humid Amazonian climate. Herbicidesvare often favored based on guarana's high demand for water an nutrients in its reproductive differentiation phase (June-August). Weed competition during this phase reduces formation of reproductive structures and thus can lower the yield drastically.
Nevertheless can inappropriate herbicide use negatively affect the environment guarana is cultivated in. Over-time, extensive herbicide and pesticide use can contribute to soil degradation, increased disease risk, pest resistance and environmental contamination. As a consequence, within the framework of sustainable agriculture, there is a growing interest in safer and environmental friendly alternatives for pest and disease management.
One promising option is the use of Trichoderma spp., a genus of beneficial fungi wildly applied as biological control agent. Trichoderma spp. is naturally present in soil, air and on plant surfaces and capable of suppressing numerous plant pathogens. Trichoderma spp. suppresses these pathogens through mycoparasitism, competition for nutrients and space and induction of systemic resistance in plants. They are most effective against soil-born pathogens (e.g. Fusarium spp.) and some foliar or spike diseases.
The application of Trichoderma-based bioformulations could potentially lower the incidence of Fusarium decemcellulare, the casual agent of over-sprouting, and other soil-born pathogens in guarana cultivation. Although field trials on guarana remain limited some studies on alternative tropical crops suggest that Trichoderma potentially enhances plant growth, improve stress tolerance and reduces dependence on chemical pesticides.

## Composition

According to the Biological Magnetic Resonance Data Bank, guaranine (better known as caffeine) is found in guaraná and is identical to caffeine derived from other sources, like coffee, tea, kola nut, and Ilex. Guaranine, theine, and mateine are all synonyms for caffeine when the definitions of those words include none of the properties and chemicals of their host plants except caffeine. 
Natural sources of caffeine contain widely varying mixtures of xanthine alkaloids other than caffeine, including the cardiac stimulants theophylline, theobromine and other substances such as polyphenols, which can form insoluble complexes with caffeine. The main natural phenols found in guaraná are (+)-catechin and (-)-epicatechin.
The table below contains a partial listing of some of the chemicals found in guaraná seeds, although other parts of the plant also may contain them in varying quantities.

## Current production economics

Properties of guarana seeds make them valuable to several industrial sectors. The world's largest producer for guarana is Brazil at the moment, with most of its production consumed domestically. Around 45% of the total outputs are used by the soft drink and beverage industry. The rest of 55% is processed into syrups, powders and pharmaceutical products The past years demand for health-orientated and functional products has been grown leading to a rapid expansion of the guarana industry in Brazil. Guarana cultivation currently covers around 15'000 hectares primary located in the states of Bahia (around 6'500 ha) and Amazonas (around 8'100 ha). Increasing global demand led ultimately as well to increasing global import and export prices on guarana seeds. In 2023, import and export ranged from $1.88 to $52.64 USD per kg. These prices increased even further in 2024 to a new range of $12.11 to $56 USD per kg. Even though demand for guarana seeds is globally rising, cultivation within Europe remains negligible. There is little published agronomic research on adapting guarana cultivation to Europe in regards to climate, soil or pest regimes. On top regulatory classification (see: European Medicines Agency, 2014) and low consumer familiarity are limiting spread of guarana as an alternative crop in Europe. Market reports estimate the European guarana market at around $0.69 billion USD in 2023 with a proposed growth to approximately $1.11 billion USD until 2030.

## Uses

### Safety

In the United States, guaraná fruit powder and seed extract have not been evaluated for the status of "generally recognized as safe" (GRAS) by the Food and Drug Administration, but rather are approved as food additives for flavor (but not non-flavor) uses.
Guaraná is used in sweetened or carbonated soft drinks and energy drinks, an ingredient of herbal teas or contained in dietary supplement capsules. South America obtains much of its caffeine from guaraná.

### Beverages

Brazil, the third-largest consumer of soft drinks in the world, produces several soft drink brands from the seeds of guaraná. A fermented drink is also prepared from guaraná seeds, cassava and water. Paraguay is also a producer of guaraná soft drinks with several brands operating in its market. The word guaraná is widely used in Brazil, Peru and Paraguay as a reference to soft drinks containing guaraná extract.
